README.md, before:

# My Public Slides

## Paper Presentations

### 2021

- [Meta Pseodu Labels, CVPR 2021](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/meta-pseudo-labels/)
- [Exploring Simple Siamese Representation Learning, CVPR 2021](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/exploring-simple-siamese-representation-learning)
- [VICReg: Variance-Invariance-Covariance Regularization for Self-Supervised Learning](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/vicreg-variance-invariance-covariance-regularization-for-self-supervised-learning)

### 2022

- [Grid Anchor based Image Cropping: A New Benchmark and An Efficient Model, TPAMI 2020](2022/grid-anchor-based-image-cropping)

## Training Courses

### 2021

- [Math for Machine Learning](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/training-courses-math/)
- [Machine Learning Basics](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/training-courses-machine-learning/)
- [Deep Learning and Computer Vision Applications](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/training-courses-deep-learning)

Commit message:

feat: add mamba in README; fix the path of GAIC

README.md, after:

# My Public Slides

## Paper Presentations

### 2021

- [Meta Pseodu Labels, CVPR 2021](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/meta-pseudo-labels/)
- [Exploring Simple Siamese Representation Learning, CVPR 2021](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/exploring-simple-siamese-representation-learning)
- [VICReg: Variance-Invariance-Covariance Regularization for Self-Supervised Learning](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/vicreg-variance-invariance-covariance-regularization-for-self-supervised-learning)

### 2022

- [Grid Anchor based Image Cropping: A New Benchmark and An Efficient Model, TPAMI 2020](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2022/grid-anchor-based-image-cropping)

### 2024

- [Mamba: Linear-Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State Spaces](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2024/mamba/)

## Training Courses

### 2021

- [Math for Machine Learning](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/training-courses-math/)
- [Machine Learning Basics](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/training-courses-machine-learning/)
- [Deep Learning and Computer Vision Applications](https://aquastripe.github.io/slides/2021/training-courses-deep-learning)
